- Hello YouTube, hello Barry, Erman, Carl.
Welcome to the show.
- Hey, hello.
- It's wonderful to have you all here.
I'm very excited about the work that you're all doing
around Python performance.
We're gonna focus on imports and this pep
that you three proposed today,
but it's really just the tip of the iceberg
in terms of a bunch of cool stuff that's going on.
So I'm very excited to dive into that
with the three of you.
Now, before we get to it though,
let's just do a quick round of introductions.
Barry, you've been on the show before
talking about 1994 Python stuff and other things.
So maybe just a quick introduction for yourself.
- Yeah, Barry Warsaw.
So I'm still here, still hanging around, I guess.
You know, I should mention, you know,
as we get into this pep though,
I'm really just the sponsor.
I gotta hand a lot of thanks to Hermon and Carl
for doing all the work on it.
Most peps these days require a core developer to sponsor.
So I'm just super interested in the topic.
I think it's a super clever approach.
And so I think it'll help specific needs
that I have at work.
And so I was really eager to...
eager to sponsor it.
- Yeah, fantastic.
All right, very cool.
Hermann, how about you?
- Well, I'm just working at Meta with Carl
and I wrote the initial approach for Lazy Imports
and well, here I am.
- Right on.
- Carl, quick introduction.
- I've been around the Python community for a while.
I think the first maybe semi-notable thing that I did
was write the first version of pip uninstall back in 2009.
That led to being a maintainer of pip and virtualen
for a while, and I worked on the Django core team
for a while.
And so yeah, I've been doing Python things for a long time
and I've been working at Meta since--
- Those are a lot of big projects there.
- Yeah, they're projects that I was using
and so I was interested in working on them
and same goes for Python itself.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Sorry, I kind of cut you off there.
You said working at Meta since 2016, is that what you said?
- Yeah, I've been working at Meta since 2016.
Working mostly on how Meta uses Python,
how Instagram uses Python.
- Yeah.
There've been some really cool looks inside what's going on,
especially at Instagram there with some of the typing talks
that Lucas gave, as well as sort of suspending
the garbage collector for other various things.
And a lot-- or was that you guys?
I think it was, right?
Yeah, we had a whole--
A lot of stuff coming out of there.
A whole saga.
We turned off the garbage collector,
turned back on the garbage collector.
There's been multiple blog posts along the way
explaining why we've done each of those silly sounding things.
>> Sure, I mean, they seem insane.
Well, a lot of the projects that,
a lot of the stuff that's coming out here,
it has to do with the Cinder project, right?
>> Yeah.
>> And you may be, I don't know who's best
to give the introduction for Cinder,
but Cinder's a really cool project about, you know,
taking a whole bunch of optimizations
and specializations you all have done
and sort of sharing that back with the community
a little bit, right?
- Yeah, so we started Cinder in I think 2017 or 2018.
There was actually two projects
kind of started simultaneously.
We realized around that time that the trajectory
for Instagram's kind of server footprint
was not really sustainable just in terms of how much
server CPU time we were spending running Python code.
And so we kicked off two projects.
One was called, it's now called Sky Bison.
It was like a ground up rewritten Python interpreter,
you know, using all the modern dynamic language VM ideas,
like a moving garbage collector
and all these different things.
We weren't the first people to try that.
And we also weren't the first people to fail.
That project was wound down last year,
just weren't able to get the performance,
particularly trying to emulate compatibility
with the C API and all the C extensions,
which is the same reason many prior rewrite efforts
didn't go very far.
So at the same time as we'd kicked off SkyBison,
we had sort of kicked off what we thought
was a short-term project of just like,
what can we squeeze out of CPython?
Where can we get a little more performance out of it?
And that turned into Cinder,
and then ended up kind of becoming our primary approach
to Python performance.
- Isn't it always the story that the C interop stuff
is the big sticking point here.
- Yeah.
- I mean, Barry, you must have seen a whole bunch
of examples from a core dev perspective.
All right.
- Yeah.
- We could just change the guild,
but the C API, we could just, but you know.
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's both, you know, Python's, you know,
advantage, you know, pros and cons, right?
Like the approachability and the usability
the C API has led directly to the incredible ecosystem
of extension modules, right?
But those also are also the hindrance for moving,
you know, ahead in a revolutionary way
with the interpreter, I think, you know.
- Right, you kind of got to live within the box,
with the walls that are put up by those constraints.
But I do think it's super important.
You know, a lot of people would maybe just think,
well, we'll just get rid of it.
Like, let's just try to move beyond it.
but when you hear people say that Python is slow
or it has these other problems,
so often what you'll see as well,
and what I did was I did a for loop in Python
and did some math and that was slow.
It's like, well, but if a thing is slow,
so often that gets rewritten in C
and then all of a sudden it's faster than,
I don't know what Java or whatever else it is
they're trying, you know, Node,
but they're trying to compare it to.
And so there's this kind of crazy switch
that gets flipped for like really high performance.
and then maybe acceptable most of the time performance.
And it's this interop with C that is the thing,
that's the escape hatch.
- Yeah, and LinkedIn, we don't have the same kind
of workloads that they have at Meta,
but we've done analysis.
One of the reasons why I was particularly interested
in this project is because we write a lot
of our CLIs in Python.
And so, we've had proponents of other languages say,
complain, "Hey, Python's really slow.
"I write a CLI in Python."
And then it takes a long time to start up.
But if you actually do the analysis,
what you find is that people are not writing,
a lot of the internal libraries that those CLIs import
do things like they go hit the network
and they go try to do the service
and create really expensive resources
at module scope time, right?
So like those are the types of analysis
that you really need to do to say,
is it really Python or is it the way we use Python?
You know, for us, it's a little of both for sure,
but often it's sort of the way Python is being used
in a non-idiomatic or not in the highest performance way.
Right?
So a little bit of rewrite of some internal code
can get you a long way.
- It sure can.
I also want to just give a quick shout out
back on episode 347, I talked with Dino Vila
like all about the Cinder project.
So if you want to check that out,
they can definitely go find that.
But there's a lot of cool things that were taken out of Cinder
and are being proposed.
And I guess that sort of brings us to our main topic for today
is imports and the PEP 690 that you all have proposed,
which I am also excited for.
I think imports are one of those things that
are a little bit mysterious to people
because they have conceptions coming from other languages,
especially compiled languages that are very different
than what the reality is.
So I do want to talk a whole bunch
about what you're offering here,
what you're proposing here in this lazy imports pep.
But before we do, let's maybe just set the stage
with what happens when I write import requests
or I write import fast API,
or even something built in like import collections?
Who wants to take this one?
Tell people what really happens
when the import statement runs, is there.
- I don't know.
I guess I'll say,
there was a time where the import system
for Python was written in C
and it was even more mysterious, I think at that point.
And I don't remember when it was,
but Brett Cannon rewrote the import system into Python.
And then about that time,
I sort of went through sort of line by line
and tried to understand, I mean, because right,
like imports are probably one of the oldest features
of Python, right?
They've been around so long
and there's so many corner cases, right?
It's a very complex system and has lots of features,
lots of hooks, lots of places where you can hook in your own behavior and really
understanding how all of that fits together.
I think I probably took a couple of months to sort of walk through the entire
system line by line and document it.
Fortunately now, if you go to the language reference guide, I think it goes into all
the gory detail about how imports work.
Everything from namespace packages to, you know, concrete packages and all the file
system hooks and meta path hooks and blah, blah, blah, blah.
Right?
So yeah.
Yeah, definitely a lot going on.
I think the key thing, though, that you are hinting at there
is this is a runtime type of behavior.
This is a runtime experience.
Carl, you're shaking your head.
What would you want to add to this?
What Barry was saying here.
Well, yeah, I mean, I think what a lot of people don't--
I mean, maybe don't consciously realize initially
about imports is that it's just executing some more code.
So it's like, you can almost think of imports in Python
as like syntax sugar for a function call
where the body of the function is the module level code
of some module and the return value is the module object
that you end up getting back from the import.
But like it really is,
it's just causing some more code to be executed
where the result is a module object that has stuff on it
that you can use.
And one of the consequences of that
is that literally anything can happen when you import a module.
I mean, like Barry was saying, it could go off and talk
to the internet.
I think people have even written stuff that automatically
goes and finds modules on the internet
and downloads them just in time to import them.
But yeah, that's the key point is that--
BRIAN KARDELL: You don't have it installed?
Let us fix that for you.
[LAUGHTER]
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
So yeah, it could be arbitrarily slow.
It could fail.
It could do anything.
Yeah.
If people have a conception of an import statement being
like a using statement in C# or an include statement in C++,
that's not--
that's kind of effectively the same intent,
but the behavior is massively different, right?
In C++, it says, here's some symbols
that should also be used for compilation.
In Python, it's literally saying,
let's just execute this file top to bottom.
And usually execution means define a function,
define a function, define a local variable, define a class,
but it could mean run some random thing,
search the file system, all sorts of stuff.
And it leads to things like this,
the if dunder name equal dunder main, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- This is a big confusion that people run into.
Why is this weird thing in Python?
Why do they recommend it, right?
And it's just because when you do an import statement,
it just runs top to bottom.
And if you put behavior in there,
well, that behavior happens, right?
So here's your way to sort of skip that.
Just as a sidebar, you all have been involved
for a long time.
Should Python have had a deaf main sort of entry point thing
like so many languages have?
I'm not saying it should or shouldn't,
I just wanna hear your thoughts on this.
- I don't know, I think this is just one of those
quirky things about the,
not even really even about the language,
it's just a quirky thing about the Python,
the way you use Python.
And to me, it's like one of those things,
you learn it and then you just use it.
But actually, I think I tend to use this much, much less now,
now that we have things like packages and entry points
and things like that.
To me, I almost am defining a main function
and then in my package metadata, I say,
well, there's my entry point
and the packaging system just does it magically.
So this is kind of a convenience
and I don't think you really actually run into it
as often nowadays as you probably did years ago.
- Sure, all my apps that are supposed
to be run directly like that,
they all have a def main somewhere.
And then this just calls the main
with this symbol here, right?
Erman, what do you think?
- Yeah, I totally agree.
It's probably not something
we should be using as much right now.
Yeah.
- Sure.
Of course, the really interesting thing here, right,
is that it's Dunder named, right?
Like that's a deeper concept about Python
that you should really understand is that
modules are objects and they have this attribute
called Dunder name.
And that Dunder name, that attribute is set to some string.
And when you call a, when you not import a file,
but call a file using the Python executable,
that file gets this string, dunder main,
assigned to that attribute, right?
So kind of like understanding a little deeper
about how Python works is really important, I think,
to be able to use it effectively.
- It is, and you hinted on being more idiomatic
to get better performance, and I totally agree with you.
All right, so now knowing kind of what it means
to do an import, let's talk about your pep.
Who wants to introduce the PEP here?
Armand, you're number one author here, so how about you go first?
Yeah, sure.
Well, we all started long before the PEP.
In 2020, when I joined Meta, it was just one month before the pandemic hit.
So I started working in Instagram code base at the time.
And well, there have been a lot of problems, constant problems there with the reload speeds
in the development server, and Instagram, and also in another ton of other command line
tools as well.
So while I worked in Instagram codebase for a couple years trying to fight and dodge the
startup performance problems that we were encountering all the time.
And when you get into codebases, the size of Instagram is,
there are a whole bunch of problems that become apparent.
One of those is-- - Yeah, most people
don't work at the scale in terms of lines of code
or number of servers or anything like that.
You're definitely pushing the outer envelope there.
- Yeah, there are thousands and thousands of modules
working here.
So one of the problems that start to become apparent
is startup speed.
And the other problem is that refactoring modules
becomes really, really hard.
So if you try to modify something to get it working better,
it suddenly starts getting,
you suddenly start getting import cycles
and other things when you just move around imports
or try to split modules.
So it gets really tricky and hard.
It's complicated.
So,
but the start speed,
when you run a module that imports other modules,
and these modules are run,
then those in turn import other modules,
and this goes on and on.
So all transitive dependencies are involved.
- Right, right.
If you just import one thing, it seems minor, but then that could import two things and
those two things could import four things.
And then it just, if you're talking thousands of modules, it can explode.
And pep eight says import goes at the top first thing, right?
It's like just to get started before you can even figure out what your code is going to
do, you would do all the imports, which is the transit of closure of every import basically.
Right?
Exactly.
So just send a subloading every single module.
Nobody is going to be used immediately,
or it's never going to be used at all.
So this was a never-ending battle with this Instagram
server.
And as soon as I realized that I was doing repetitive work that
was very complex and produced very fragile changes.
And that was really hard to maintain.
And at the end, it didn't really yield the improvements
that we needed.
So I thought I set sail to write Lazy Imports.
And that's when we started implementing that.
Well, the pip is, you know,
when we try to show to the world what we did
and the results that we were having,
when we get to the US PyCon 2020 in Salt Lake City,
I was planning to discuss this at the Language Summit,
but at the end, Carl ended up giving
the really good overview there,
explaining what it was.
I don't know, Kyle, can you add?
- Yeah, we were,
I think Hermann proposed a talk for the language summit
at this last PyCon 2022 in Salt Lake City
for the language summit,
and there just wasn't space in the schedule.
So the language summit organizers
had to pick some things to leave out.
And so they didn't squeeze in Lazy Imports.
But then at the language summit, a couple of different people
brought up Lazy Imports, that they
had heard that we had done this and wanted
to know more about it.
And there was a lightning talks slot
at the end of the language summit.
So in the middle of the afternoon,
sitting there at the language summit,
I just put together about 10 slides on what Lazy Imports is
and how it works.
And I gave a quick lightning talk.
And on the way back to my seat from giving the lightning talk,
Guido leaned over and said, "Just write the PEP already."
So I was a little bit of a positive encouragement
and a nudge.
- Yeah, that's encouragement.
- So then Hermann was at the sprints
and so the two of us sat down together at the sprints
on the first day and said, "All right, let's write a PEP."
So we put together PEP 690.
- And he said, "Hey, oh, Barry's walking by, grab him."
- Well, I mean, this is something that's been on my radar
at LinkedIn for quite a while, like I said,
because we have tons of CLIs written in Python.
And I think the thing that, you know,
like this is not the first attempt at lazy imports.
Like, you know, there's been lots of different approaches,
but I think what really kind of struck,
certainly what struck me,
and I suspect what struck Guido
was the really clever implementation
of this particular approach to it.
I don't know who came up with that,
but whoever did it was like really a stroke of genius.
because it really gives you the transparency
that I think you need to make this a success.
So maybe Carl or Hermann can talk about that a little bit.
- Yeah, well, let's first define just like
what is the pep proposing?
So we've described traditionally what it means
when you say import thing, it executes all the Python
and if there's some inline behaviors
that runs those behaviors
and that all happens at the top.
How is this different?
What change is this proposing to the CPython runtime?
- Hermann?
- Probably can go for this, Karl.
- Okay, I can take it.
Yeah, I mean, the basic idea is just
that when you hit an import statement,
is say, import foo, instead of immediately at that point
going off and finding the foo module, the source code,
and executing the entire module top to bottom
and doing all that work, and then, of course,
all the transitive imports from that,
and et cetera, et cetera, that all we do when we hit import
foo is we basically remember, all right, we
have this name foo.
It refers to a module somewhere.
We're going to put off the work of figuring out
what that module is and actually executing it.
And we're just going to remember that whenever foo is used,
that means we need to go find out what it is
and actually execute it.
So then that name foo will just kind of sit there
in the global namespace of whichever module imported it.
And oftentimes, foo won't even be used or referenced anywhere
in the module body of the module that imported it.
So we can go through the whole way importing that module,
and foo just continues to sit there
as kind of this deferred pending import.
And then later at runtime, maybe somebody
calls a function from our module.
And within that function, we have a call to foo.bar
or something like that, a reference
to some attribute of the module.
And at that moment, the first time we actually, at runtime,
run into a reference to the name foo,
that's the moment when we'll suddenly say, OK,
hold everything.
We need to go off, figure out what foo is, import it.
Now we actually have the proper foo module.
And now we can go ahead and figure out what foo.bar is
and move on.
So that's kind of the essence of PEP 690, is to try to do that.
Defer imports until the moment when they're first referenced,
but try to do it transparently so that as much as possible,
apart from side effects of the import itself,
you really can't tell the difference in your code
that the import was delayed.
>>Right, the runtime behavior might
be a little bit different.
Ideally, faster and using less memory, which would be great.
But other than that, your code shouldn't--
but maybe italics-- shouldn't know the difference.
If you're doing good coding styles and good patterns,
basically not creating side effects during imports,
you shouldn't be able to tell the difference.
And so if you've got, say, a function that uses JSON parsing
but that only periodically gets called under some pass,
you could avoid import JSON effectively
unless you need that bit of functionality.
And for larger projects that can really cascade, right?
- Right, that's the whole idea.
So if you think of like a command line program
that maybe has like 10 sub commands, right?
And each of those sub commands
might do something fairly different
and they might have very different dependencies.
So on any given time that you run that command line program,
if you're only using one sub command,
you don't actually need any of the dependencies
of the other nine subcommands.
So with lazy imports, you can avoid,
you can basically pay for what you use
every time you run a program and only pay for what you use.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
I really liked the idea.
And the transparent aspect of it is,
what Barry was fond of is that
we write code the way we traditionally wrote.
We write import requests or import JSON
or whatever at the top.
and it's up to a special dictionary
that replaces a standard dictionary that holds the globals.
It says when you access one of these things,
if it's not yet materialized and really imported,
go do that and then hand it off.
Otherwise just hand off the module, right?
Something like that?
- Yeah, yeah.
I think you've said it really well.
- Thanks.
- It's actually a standard dictionary for the module,
but it's just a specialized lookup function, essentially.
- Got it. - Right.
So when that deferred object gets installed
into the modules dictionary,
and this is, I think it's really key because
at the point at which that the dictionary lookup function
finds this deferred object,
that's when the object is resolved.
And what that really means is that at the Python level,
and even if you're a extension writer
accessing the modules dictionary,
you never see those deferred objects.
So they're completely hidden,
both from the C extension author and Python developer.
It's just complete,
and that's where the transparency really shines.
- Yeah, that's where, yeah.
Yeah, 'cause if you're gonna force a new programming model
onto people, all of a sudden, they're gonna not like it.
And we saw how easy that was to go from two to three.
- Yeah.
- Right, so let's not try that again.
Oh, it was so easy.
I guess before we get further into this,
it's worth pointing out that this is in draft status.
It was created about a month and a week ago,
so it's not super old.
It's in draft.
If it appears, it'll be in 3.12 probably.
What's the status of the PEP?
It's basically proposed and under discussion?
>>Yeah, it's being currently discussed.
I think I went and looked recently and saw that in discuss.python.org, in the peps category,
I think the pep690 thread has more posts than any other thread there.
So it's been thoroughly discussed.
But at this point, I think to some extent, the discussion is on hold while we work on
getting an implementation against the Python main branch.
our implementation in Cinder. Cinder is unfortunately still based on Python 3.8.
We're currently working on upgrading it to 3.10. But there's some changes in the underlying
dictionary and in other things between 3.8 and now 3.12 alpha. So the implementation needs some
reworking. And we need to get that available for people to look at and play with to really move to
the next stage in discussion. >> Yeah. Just a side note. So with
Projects like Cinder and stuff, it's based on 3.8,
which is great.
There's a lot of good features.
I mean, basically 3.6 and beyond, you get f-strings,
you get async and away.
You get a lot of amazing stuff there.
But this shift from 10 to 11, there's
a big performance boost that's sort of coming along there.
Are you guys looking to sort of bring all of this stuff
into 11 as sort of a stable point?
Or what's the story there?
>>Tomtom: For Cinder in general?
Yeah, yeah.
So I mean, we're currently upgrading to 3.10
just to go two versions at a time
instead of trying to leap three versions in one bound.
And also because, as you said, there's
a lot of changes between 3.10 and 3.11.
So we want to kind of isolate those and get 3.10 stable first
and get it in production for Instagram and everything.
So that's our current target.
And then once that's done, we'll probably
look at 3.12 next.
But yeah, we do wanna bring Cinder up to date
and also really looking at trying to upstream
a lot of the things that are in Cinder
so that more people can benefit from them
and to reduce the amount of work we have to do
to be constantly rebasing all of our stuff
on newer versions of Python.
So our goal, hopefully--
- Every one of these you get accepted.
Yeah, sorry, everything that you get accepted
is just one fewer thing you have to maintain.
You can't do it to Barry, let Barry do it.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Well, I mean, we hope to continue to help maintain
these things upstream too.
>> Yes, of course.
Yeah, of course.
But if you can make it part of the broader community thing,
it's no longer your team.
It's the community's benefit.
Yeah.
OK, let's talk a little bit about some
of the different forms of imports
and how they affect this.
Because out in the audience, Hybrid Robotics
asks, when you do from library import function,
does this really save memory?
I think that maybe sets the stage for talking about
when there's different styles of imports we can do,
obviously, we can just do import library,
we could do from library import function
or import star, all these different things.
And there's rules in the pep about
how that controls the laziness or the alternative,
I guess the current default way is called eager loading
or eager imports, right?
- I think it's really good that HyperRobotic
brought up this question of from library import function,
because that's actually a key way that PEP 690 is different
from the existing ways of doing lazy imports.
So there are existing things out there.
There's a lazy import loader in the standard library,
and there's something called demand import
on the package index that came out of Mercurial.
And all of these things take the approach
of having a custom module object
that when you do a get attribute on it,
it has a dunder get attr or dunder get attribute
implementation that waits for an attribute access
and then goes out and does the import.
And that works for import foo, but it doesn't make
from foo import bar lazy, because from foo import bar
gets the foo module, and then you immediately
access the bar attribute on it.
And so if you're using this lazy module object style,
then effectively it's just eager,
because you get the attribute off it right away,
and that makes the import happen.
And the difference with PEP 690 is
that with from foo import bar, we just stick a lazy object
into the namespace of the importing module
under the name bar instead of under the name foo.
But it's still a lazy object, and the import still
won't happen until something later actually
uses the name bar.
So even in the case of from foo import bar,
we're still able to make it lazy,
and it still will save memory, at least until or unless you
actually use the imported thing.
Yeah, that's a great summary. I would like to point out maybe just
not entirely sure where they're coming from here. So
today, if you write from library import function versus just import library or from library import
star, you're not really saving any memory. It basically is doing the same thing, right? The
module object is created, it's imported, all the stuff is done. It's just what symbols are defined
for you, right? It's more of a syntax thing than it is a memory thing right now. Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, that's correct.
- Yeah, but in the thing you're proposing,
this will still be the lazy version, which is great.
- Yes, yes.
- Yeah, so there's different ways in which we do import.
Sometimes people even do imports inside of try blocks.
So like try to import this thing,
and if it's not there, maybe try to shim it in
or report that this module is a dependency or other things.
And it's literally the import statement that is supposed to succeed or fail that communicates back
Whether or not that was okay, right?
And with this lazy version you're going to change
It's not going to fail within that tribe lock because within the tribe lock it's going to create a deferred
Lazy thing and that'll always work, right?
Well
It actually could also fail in certain circumstances, but for the most part it should just work
If you have an import inside a try block or inside a class or inside a function, all those
imports are eager imports.
>> Right, exactly.
So what I was getting at is that you're actually specifying that if there's an import within
a try except or within a with block, you're actually not letting that be lazy.
You're making them be eager, right?
>> That's right.
Yeah, exactly.
Although imports inside this important thing are also lazy.
So if any of those fail, and you're expecting those to fail,
it could not throw an exception there
in that reason, in that case.
- Okay.
And then also from thing import star has to be eager.
Why does that one have to be eager?
- Yeah, because we don't have the current names
of that are being imported.
And so there's no way to add these lazy objects
to these names.
So we need to just import everything
and see what are the names that are being imported.
That's the main reason for it.
- Yeah, right.
Because when you say star,
you don't know what to put into the modules symbol table.
Right?
So you've got to actually do the import
to figure out the star.
That's pretty interesting.
So there's some interesting examples
you have in the pep that people can check out about.
Here's sort of a fake slow module that just
does time.sleep, but it effectively
shows that it could be slow.
You can run it like do an import,
and it'll run instantly, basically,
because it's not actually--
if you're not accessing that module, really, at that point,
it's pretty much instant.
I guess one thing to point out here-- and this is--
I don't know how I feel about this,
but maybe we could talk about it a bit.
The proposal is that this is not the default behavior
for Python indefinitely into the future,
that you have to pass a -l flag to the interpreter
or set an environment variable or something along those lines.
Do you want to talk about why make it opt in instead of maybe
opt out?
- Yeah, probably, I wish it wasn't,
I wish it was a default.
That's what I would wish to.
But the thing, the reality is that
there are a lot of applications and modules
that are using or relying on import side effects.
So we can just expect those
to be lazy import compatible anytime soon.
- So you're saying there's a lot of bad code out there?
Is that what you're saying?
No.
But if it has side effects, right?
If it's like, oh, because you imported this, we've initialized the database connection.
Well, I guess, I guess the way you know, there's actually some really good discussion on the
discourse thread about this.
And I feel like this is, this is actually an important aspect of the PEP.
one of the things that was sort of pointed out in this discussion is that,
you know, like I'm, I both author libraries and I author applications,
right? As a library author, I can't really reason about whether I can sort
of say, yeah, maybe my library is unsafe for lazy, but I can never really say,
assert that my module is safe for laziness
and be certain that in all the ways
that all my downstream consumers
are gonna use my library, right?
That it's always gonna be safe for lazy import.
So as a library author,
it's not really something that I can necessarily assert,
right?
But as an application author,
I should have, I'm really in the only position
to reason about how my dependencies are used
inside my application.
So in my mind, it's my responsibility
as an application author to say,
I know how all my dependencies are used
and therefore I can assert that lazy imports
are safe for my application.
So by using it, by having the,
I'm a little uncertain about the environment variable,
but I feel pretty strongly like the flag.
It's the responsibility of the--
yeah.
Yeah, it's the responsibility of the person running it,
sort of, OK?
Yeah, it's the leaf--
the leaf depends.
Yeah, yeah, it's the top--
the top of the tree.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, to give an example of what Barry is talking about
is like, I mean, for better or worse,
some level of import side effects
are just kind of built into Python.
Like if you have a module that subclasses a class
from another module, you may think
that you have a module with no import side effects,
but actually importing your module
adds something to the Dunder subclasses of the module
you inherited from.
And so even code that apparently looks
very clean and clear of import side effects
does technically have some side effects on import.
And the real question is, is anybody actually
looking at Dunder subclasses on the parent module.
And there's a lot of common library patterns
like decorators that when you decorate a function,
they register that function to that class
and some registry and some other module.
So then suddenly again, you have an important side of--
- Like Flask or something, yeah.
- Right, yep, exactly.
So it really has to be the person writing the application
and testing the application who says,
I'm gonna try lazy imports,
I'm gonna see if things work.
I know how my dependencies are used.
If it works well and all my tests pass,
then I can consider just turning this on at that level.
- Sure.
Okay, interesting.
So taking Barry's idea that it's the application owner
who should sort of make this decision,
what about having some code artifact
that allows you to signal that as well, right?
So as I run it, I can control whether or not this happens.
But what if I just, the very first line of my app.py
or whatever it is, I just say, import lazy
or something like that.
And then every subsequent thing
from there on behaves that way.
That way, if I distribute my app to someone else,
I don't have to convince them or teach them about -l.
I can just say, no, just double click this thing
or run this and it'll go in a consistent way.
- Yeah, we actually...
Go ahead, go ahead, Barry.
- I was just gonna say,
as long as you don't have like PTH files
that are getting in the way
before your main gets called, right?
Go ahead, Carl, sorry.
- Yeah, no, I was just gonna say,
there was a lot of discussion about that in the thread
and there actually is a draft
of a heavily revised version of the PEP
up for Barry's review, actually.
So, Barry, you can...
- Barry, you want me to pull that up for you?
We can go through it right now.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
(laughing)
- One of the changes that is made in that draft
is both removing the environment variable
because people were concerned about the risk
that if somebody just got the idea that,
oh, lazy imports makes everything faster,
they might try to just set the environment variable
in their shell.
And then all of the Python programs they run
will try to run with lazy imports and might break
and then they're reporting bugs.
And that's not a great experience.
we want it to be really limited to an application
that's tested with lazy imports.
So the latest draft of the PEP removes
the environment variable and actually adds exactly
what you're talking about, a programmatic way
to enable lazy imports for your application in code.
- What is the code way?
- Well, I mean, it's just a proposal in my draft PR
to the PEP text right now.
So we'll see what Barry says about it.
- Sure.
- It could well change.
- The reason I asked, the reason I asked--
- I just rubber stamped it.
(laughing)
- So the reason I ask is,
there's sometimes certain things you've got to do
to like tweak the path or something
to get imports to work right
if you're running from some weird location or something,
thinking of like Alembic migrations and stuff like that.
But in a lot of the editors and the lynchers,
they'll whine at you and say,
"No, no, no, these imports that go below that
modification to the path statement, they go above it."
Like, no, the whole point of the thing above it
is so the things below it don't fail.
Is there-- like, whatever it is, I just
want to put in a little hint.
Like, if you could make the editors not complain
that the stuff below it should go above it,
because the stuff below it is controlled by the stuff
above it, you know what I mean?
Yeah, the current proposal, I don't think--
I mean, I suppose if it becomes merged,
the linters and such could special case it.
I think hopefully that's not too huge of an issue,
because the idea is, I mean,
you potentially have a large application
and this would occur like in one main module.
- Or you just put like all this function.
Yeah, you put the hash ignore and then you're good to go.
- Right.
- You got it.
Okay, cool.
Let's go talk about some of the benefits here.
So in terms of performance,
you saw, I don't know where's the,
if I go searching for percent signs, there we go.
So it says it's already been demonstrated for startup time
improvements of 70% and memory reduction of real-world CLIs
by 40%.
Those are not joking around.
This is not playing at the edges of performance changes.
This is significant.
So are those numbers from what you're
doing with Instagram or other tools that you tested it on
or something like that?
- These are numbers from Instagram, Instagram server.
And also I love common line tools that we use inside meta.
So yeah, these are real numbers.
It's up to 70%.
Sometimes we've seen 50% improvement in startup speed.
And memory is also up to 40%.
We've seen 20%. - Right, these are upper bound
of course, sure.
But what I think is good about that is it's not,
you know, sometimes people say,
well, let's see how fast Python is.
I'm gonna do a while true loop
and see how many times I can increment a number
and compare that to doing that and see like, it's okay.
Nobody does this and they don't really care about how fast,
like how do real apps behave?
How do real, and so this is you taking the stuff
that you all work with day to day
and trying to make it faster
and getting significant benefits from it.
- Yeah, and I think an important thing to note there,
yeah, I think an important thing to note there
that Hermann mentioned is that
this isn't just one code base.
So, we've seen this as repeatable scale of improvement
across a variety of different tools.
In fact, recently we've started to see,
we have a lot of data science people and researchers
who use a lot of Jupyter notebooks,
and they've started to really quickly pick up
Jupyter notebooks kernels based on Cinder
with lazy imports enabled,
because they're seeing similar startup time
and memory use numbers for their Jupyter notebooks.
So across a fairly wide range of use cases and types of programs,
we are seeing these kinds of numbers
as consistently repeatable.
>> Yeah, that's interesting, the data science side.
A lot of those libraries are pretty large.
And so I suspect that's probably pretty valuable.
So one of the things you all talk about
is that this proposal also will eliminate--
what would you call it-- false import cycles?
I don't know.
Do you wanna talk about the cycle benefit
that we might get here?
- Yeah. - Don't answer,
whoever wants to grab it.
- I can try saying something about the import cycles.
When you have imports at the top of the module
and you're not using this import,
and some of the imports that you are declaring there
are importing something and in turn,
at some point ends up importing the first module,
then you have a cycle, right?
So if one of these imports is not actually being used
and is being deferred to a use case
where it is only resolved inside a function further down,
which is not being immediately called,
then we won't have these cycles.
And then a lot of times we have these kind of imports
that are declared on the top of the modules
because PEP-8 says that it's recommended
to have all imports in the top of the module.
And so people just start putting imports there
because it's cleaner and looks better,
but it ends up provoking these,
because in this import cycles.
- Nice, so hopefully this will solve some of those issues.
I know when I first got into Python,
I didn't understand why there wasn't a better way out of,
like sharing code in a bi-directional way.
It was really, it took a lot of thinking,
like, okay, how can I structure my code
into different files that don't feel like
all just went in one file and yet allow me to reference it.
Like, for example, if I've got one class
and it works with another and it has a function
that returns one type of it, but the other one might have a field
which is one of those and you want to do a type declaration
of saying which one is which, or you need to create the--
call initializer of one or something.
Those kinds of bidirectional relationships are hard to model.
And it sounds like this doesn't really address or fix
or change those in any significant way,
but the other ones just about the timing can go away, right?
So the only import cycles that lazy imports don't fix
are the ones where basically it would be a cycle
even if you had it in the same module,
like where you're literally using names
in a bidirectional way at module level,
and so there's no way you can order them
even within one module and have it work.
So essentially four references.
Those kinds of cycles, the lazy imports doesn't fix. But really any other kind of cycle where
anywhere in the cycle one of the uses is inside a function, all of those are taken care of.
And so even for the type annotation ones, if you use from future import annotations,
PEP 563 or another proposal, PEP 649, anything that makes the type annotations also lazily
evaluated, so they aren't eagerly evaluated at import time, then all of a sudden your cycles
with that plus lazy imports, then all the cycle problems with type annotations also just disappears.
I thought one of the, I was just gonna say, I think one of the interesting things that
I think it was Carl pointed out when we were talking about this is that if you've got, you
know, the converse is right, if you've got an application or something that's using this late,
these lazy imports, and then you turn them off, you might be hit
with a bunch of cycles that were sort of, you know, hidden from
you because of the lazy feature, right? So you have to be a
little bit careful about, you know, engaging with lazy imports
and then turning them off, right, getting everything eager.
So it's just one of those things to watch out for.
Oh, interesting. Yeah. If, if you're doing it by running it
with the run flag, you could be effectively hiding a runtime
error that someone else would hit if they ran it without.
- Yeah.
- Right, right.
Again, kind of back to my like,
could the code define this instead of a runtime flag?
So it's like absolutely consistent, yeah.
Okay, let's talk about debuggability a little bit.
So normally when you have an exception,
if I import thing and there's a problem importing
that thing, I'll get an exception on the line that the import did. But with this lazy thing,
it'll be the import error will occur where the first attempt to touch it happens. Right.
But you you all do some work to figure out and sort of report back. The error came from
where the original import statement was, right?
- Yes, yes, the error should be reported
where the import is being declared
so that it's easier to debug.
Yes, this can also produce import errors in anywhere.
So the other thing that we are thinking about
adding to this implementation is to have an error wrapper
around the real error that is being thrown.
So we can easily know that it's just an import error
coming from a lazy import.
- Got it.
Yeah, and it could theoretically, I guess,
get caught in a situation
where people would have not expected it, right?
It could have a overly aggressive try except block.
There's like, well, there's only two types of exceptions
that come out of here possibly ever.
And either of them, I'm gonna handle it in this case.
Well, now here's a third, it's a surprise.
- Yeah.
Okay, but at least from sort of figuring out
where the error came from,
I guess you guys, what do you call it?
Deferred exceptions is what you actually called that, right?
Yeah.
- Right.
- So there's a couple of code examples in here
and I'm through here.
- Okay, you also have some code APIs.
I talked about my wish for some code thing
to declare laziness, I guess, is the way to put it.
But different things happen.
Like if you do the import within a tri-block,
that forces them to be eager,
but you also have defined this eager imports context manager
sort of, that will force the imports to be eager, right?
And I say sort of because it's not actually
the eager imports thing, it's the with block.
whatever you put in there, if you don't import in it
is what's gonna trigger it, right?
- Yeah, it doesn't matter.
- Yeah, and then the third way is you can import,
set eager imports and actually pass
like namespace names in there.
Because one of the problems is I'm gonna import a thing
that's a package whose code I don't control
and I need it to, for one particular thing,
eagerly import that, right?
So you kind of have to force it down the line
or it's out of the chain of control there.
So you can sort of set like, I wanna do fast API dot
whatever like exceptions or whatever's in there.
I wanna make sure that that eager loads
even though I don't control fast API, right?
So you wanna talk about some of these code tricks
that you have here?
- Yeah.
- Or tools, I guess is a better word.
- Set eagle.
Sorry.
- I just, maybe not tricks, tools or something.
Things you can use to control it.
- Right.
Yeah, set Angular imports just for opting out
certain modules.
I mean, application owners should be the ones
adding their own compatible libraries here.
If they find or figure out that they are playing well
with lazy imports.
Sometimes you've seen that many, many--
- So if I'm a library, yeah, so if I write a library
and I see that my sub module cannot deal with being lazy,
I could put this in my code to avoid,
no matter what people set for the runtime flag,
I could avoid that problem for my library, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
So you can always try it first
and if you are the application owner
and you know exactly what you need
to this application to work,
you can try it in modules.
A lot of libraries just work out of the box,
so you don't need to do anything.
there are some libraries that don't work.
And if you can make those work in some other way,
you can then have these as bigger imports
and lose the benefits of placing imports in those libraries.
- Yeah. - When it's needed.
- Okay.
Yeah, these are all,
these are really interesting to see here.
Like you can even pass a callback
that will be handed a module name
and it can decide.
You could say, I don't wanna just say all the names
that are of this sub module,
but just anything that matches this pattern,
let's just tell it we wanna eagerly import that.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, it looks nice, I like it.
There's another question from the audience,
back to a code question,
an explicit opt-in as hybrid robotics also asks.
I really like the idea of import lazy or lazy import library
or something like that to be explicit about it.
And you all actually specifically addressed
whether or not there should be some syntax code
that makes this happen instead of changing the default.
What's the thoughts there?
Yeah, I mean, I think I can speak to that a little bit.
I mean, I think generally we're not opposed to the idea
of syntax for lazy imports,
but the kinds of like memory and startup time wins
that we've seen really depend on very broad application
of lazy imports with just very narrowly targeted opt-outs.
That's what you need in order to really get to a situation
where you're actually paying for what you use
in a robust way where you're not in a situation
where you just accidentally add one import in one place
and all of a sudden all your games just disappear like that.
If it's really across the code base,
then it's very robust startup time and memory wins
where you add one import
and while you might pay for a little more,
but you're not gonna suddenly start paying
a hundred percent of the cost again.
So it feels like adding new syntax is a much bigger hurdle
in terms of the steering council
and having to change the Python grammar and all that.
And when the syntax, the per import syntax
isn't really even useful in gaining the wins
that are the primary motivation for the pep,
then it doesn't feel like a good trade-off
to add that to the pep.
- Sure.
I think I agree with that.
That seems pretty reasonable to me.
What about the reverse?
What about if you, so instead of something,
Instead of doing something like this,
where you say, I'm gonna force these to be,
I'm gonna like run some code to make these modules eager.
What if as a library author,
I could write eager import my thing,
or something along those lines.
Now, I really don't wanna see more syntax in Python.
Like there was a huge battle over whether a colon
goes by an equal sign.
So I'm not necessarily suggesting we should do this.
But--
- I would say there's nothing necessarily wrong with that.
It's more just that adding new syntax is a higher bar
and maybe we should get some experience.
When the same thing is easily possible
with existing syntax, like a context manager,
we may as well get some experience with the feature
in a less invasive way before we go adding syntax.
- Right, if you see so many people using it
and benefiting from it, then you could consider it.
I mean, one example of that is like 3.4 to 3.5
when there was async IO introduced
and then there was async and await introduced
on top of that.
- Right, even things like property, right?
Like the property decorator was,
you know, a feature that was available
before the decorator syntax was added.
So it's a tried and true, you know, strategy for Python.
Let's get experience with the feature
and then, you know, we can make adjustments
to any syntax to make it prettier, you know, down the road.
- Yeah, that's a good path.
Awesome.
All right, well, really, really good work on this, you guys.
This is exciting.
I would like to see the status change from draft to--
- I guess I have to go do something after this chat.
- Perhaps so, perhaps.
Awesome.
But now people know about the conversation
much more broadly, and maybe we'll get some more,
Even more comments on the discourse thread there.
Cool, all right, well, let's maybe wrap that up
because I think we're about out of time.
But before I let you all out of here,
I've got the two questions to quickly answer
since there's three of you.
Barry, if you're gonna write some code,
what editor are you using these days?
- It's always gonna be Emacs for me.
I, you know, it's funny 'cause Brett, you know,
Brett works at Microsoft and so, you know,
LinkedIn and Microsoft.
- He had something to do with some editor.
I think people,
a few people may have heard of or something.
- Yeah, and I keep telling Brett,
I wanna, I wanna, you know,
if I was starting today,
I would probably use VS code,
but Emacs is just deeply in my bones.
- Got it.
Ermon, how about you?
- I used to use Sublime Text,
even though it didn't have autocomplete.
So I added some autocomplete from working Komodo IDE editor, autocomplete to sublime text.
But nowadays in meta I'm using VS code and also being when I'm in a terminal.
>> Right on. Carl? >> Yeah, I used to be an Emacs user.
I mentioned that's how Barry and I very first connected back at PyCon 2008.
but I have switched to VS Code.
There's a lot of integrations with VS Code
in terms of meta infrastructure
and maintaining all that stuff myself for Emacs
just became more of a hassle than I wanted to pay.
So I've switched to it.
- Did what, two jobs and one was enough?
- Right.
- All right.
And then notable PyPI package,
something that you think is pretty cool,
you just wanna give a shout out to, popular or not.
Go in reverse order, Carl, how about you?
- Well, I guess I'll give a shout out to something
that I use in all of my projects,
which is, I guess, depending on the project,
either Pyre or mypy.
I'm a big fan of type checking my Python code.
- Yeah, fantastic.
German?
- Yeah, well, Pyre is pretty good.
I like that one.
MicroSort, which sorts your imports at the top of the file.
It's also very useful.
- Yeah, if there's an import syntax,
that makes all the other ones lazy.
All these tools are gonna have to learn about,
well, this one doesn't go before the other,
or you could give it something like AAAAA lazy.
(all laughing)
All right, Barry, how about you, notable package?
- For me, it's a PDM, which is a package manager
and sort of a build backend.
I went through an exercise a couple of months ago
where I just was finally wanting to get rid
of all my setup.pys and setup.cfgs
and just fully embrace pyproject.toml
and see how far it could go.
And I was actually pretty happy
with being able to get rid of both
of those legacy packaging files.
So I tried a bunch of the different package managers
and I really liked PDM.
So I kind of settled on that one for my personal stuff.
- Yeah, fantastic.
All right, well, final call to action.
People want to maybe have their thoughts heard on this.
What do they do?
- I guess the discourse thread.
Discuss.python.org, look for the PEPs category
and look for PEP 690.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, cool.
And you can love it or not love it or stuff like that.
There's sort of ways to give just a heart feedback as well.
So cool.
>>The other thing you can do is pressure
the sponsor of the pep to stop being so lazy.
>>I would find it incorrect if you were not
lazy on this particular one.
I mean, you've got to just swim in that waterfall
and see how it feels before you can really
make a decision on that.
>>Right, right, right, right, right.
>>Awesome.
All right, well, gentlemen, thank you for being here.
It's been great having you all on the show.
>>Thanks, Michael.
- Thanks so much, Michael.
Thanks for inviting us.
Appreciate it.
- Yeah, you bet.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]